% The Scheme Programming Language
% R. Kent Dybvig

The Scheme Programming Language

Fourth Edition

R. Kent Dybvig

Illustrations by Jean-Pierre Hébert

 Copyright © 2009 [The MIT
Press](http://mitpress.mit.edu/catalog/item/default.asp?ttype=2&tid=11984).
Electronically reproduced by permission.\
 Illustrations © 2009 [Jean-Pierre
Hébert](http://hebert.kitp.ucsb.edu/)\
 ISBN 978-0-262-51298-5 / LOC QA76.73.S34D93\
 [to order this
book](http://mitpress.mit.edu/catalog/item/default.asp?ttype=2&tid=11984)
/ [about this book](#about)

[http://www.scheme.com](http://www.scheme.com)

## About

### From the back cover

Scheme is a general-purpose programming language, descended from Algol
and Lisp, widely used in computing education and research and a broad
range of industrial applications. This thoroughly updated edition of
*The Scheme Programming Language* provides an introduction to Scheme and
a definitive reference for standard Scheme, presented in a clear and
concise manner. Written for professionals and students with some prior
programming experience, it begins by leading the programmer gently
through the basics of Scheme and continues with an introduction to some
of the more advanced features of the language.

The fourth edition has been substantially revised and expanded to bring
the content up to date with the current Scheme standard, the Revised^6^
Report on Scheme. All parts of the book were updated and three new
chapters were added, covering the language's new library, exception
handling, and record-definition features.

The book offers three chapters of introductory material with numerous
examples, eight chapters of reference material, and one chapter of
extended examples and additional exercises. All of the examples can be
entered directly from the keyboard into an interactive Scheme session.
Answers to many of the exercises, a complete formal syntax of Scheme,
and a summary of forms and procedures are provided in appendixes.

*The Scheme Programming Language* is the only book available that serves
both as an introductory text in a variety of courses and as an essential
reference for Scheme programmers.

**About the Author**

R. Kent Dybvig is Professor of Computer Science at Indiana University
and principal developer of Chez Scheme.

**Endorsements**

"Kent Dybvig's *The Scheme Programming Language* is to Scheme what
Kernighan and Ritchie's *The C Programming Language* is to C. Kent's
book is the book for either the novice or serious Scheme programmer. Its
style, wit, and organization has reached a new high with the publication
of the fourth edition."\
 —**Daniel P. Friedman**, Department of Computer Science, Indiana
University

"Students in my Programming Language Concepts class need to learn the
basics of Scheme in a few days, and to pick up harder concepts
throughout the course. For 19 years, *The Scheme Programming Language*
has been an excellent guide for them. Dybvig's rapid-fire prose and
examples serve both the Scheme beginner and the experienced programmer
in need of a reference. Seldom do my students make a point of praising a
computer science textbook; that happens over and over with this one."\
 —**Claude W. Anderson**, Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology

"Eric Raymond once wrote that learning Lisp makes one a better
programmer for the rest of one's days. Scheme is the best dialect of
Lisp to learn for this purpose, and Kent Dybvig's book provides a
comprehensive and beautiful introduction to learning Scheme and becoming
a better programmer."\
 —**Olivier Danvy**, Aarhus University, Denmark, co-Editor-in-Chief of
*Higher-Order and Symbolic Computation*
